Prompt API: Add overview for Prompt API (#43848)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/languagemodel/availability_static/index.md

---
title: "LanguageModel: availability() static method"
short-title: availability()
slug: Web/API/LanguageModel/availability_static
page-type: web-api-static-method
browser-compat: api.LanguageModel.availability_static
---

{{APIRef("Prompt API")}}{{SecureContext_Header}}

The **`availability()`** static method of the {{domxref("LanguageModel")}} interface returns a status identifier indicating whether the browser's language model supports a given set of configuration options, without creating a session or triggering a download.

> Use `availability()` before calling {{domxref("LanguageModel.create_static", "LanguageModel.create()")}} to determine whether the desired configuration is supported. This avoids initiating a session (and spending tokens) only to have it fail, and lets you provide a meaningful fallback to users when the configuration is not supported.

Reviewer: We don't care about spending tokens at this point because we don't have a session yet. The problem with the terminology is it makes people think that there is a cost in the same way as a subscription. Should check that is purged everywhere.

```suggestion
Use `availability()` before calling {{domxref("LanguageModel.create_static", "LanguageModel.create()")}} to determine whether the desired configuration is supported. This avoids initiating a session only to have it fail, and lets you provide a meaningful fallback to users when the configuration is not supported.
```

Reviewer 2: I've removed this instance and confirmed it isn't used anywhere else.

---
title: "LanguageModel: availability() static method"
short-title: availability()
slug: Web/API/LanguageModel/availability_static
page-type: web-api-static-method
spec-urls: https://webmachinelearning.github.io/prompt-api/
---

{{APIRef("Prompt API")}}{{SecureContext_Header}}

> The **`availability()`** static method of the {{domxref("LanguageModel")}} interface returns the availability status of the browser's language model for the given options without creating a session or triggering a download.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **`availability()`** static method of the {{domxref("LanguageModel")}} interface returns the availability status of the browser's language model for the given options, without creating a session or triggering a download.
```

> Use `availability()` before calling {{domxref("LanguageModel.create_static", "LanguageModel.create()")}} to determine whether the desired configuration is supported. This avoids initiating a session only to have it fail, and lets you provide a meaningful fallback to users when the model is not available.

Reviewer: So I assume that the mechanism will return unavailable if any of the specified options aren't available? We probably should spell that out, and maybe note that means specifying options you don't need "just in in case" is a bad idea.

Author: It will be in the return value section.

## Syntax

```js-nolint
LanguageModel.availability()
LanguageModel.availability(options)
```

### Parameters

- `options` {{optional_inline}}
  - : Represents the base set of options used when checking language model availability or creating a session. Options include:
    - `expectedInputs`

>       - : A sequence representing the required input modalities and languages. Options include:

Reviewer: Javascript supports arrays and other types of iterables. I think a sequence in spec language is an array. Should be updated everywhere.

Author: Done.

});

if (status === "available") {
  const session = await LanguageModel.create({
    expectedInputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["ja"] }],
    expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
  });
  const translation = await session.prompt("桜はきれいです");
  console.log(translation);
}
```

### Checking availability for a multimodal configuration

```js
const availability = await LanguageModel.availability({
  expectedInputs: [{ type: "text" }, { type: "image" }],
  expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
});

if (availability === "unavailable") {
  console.warn("This configuration is not supported.");
} else {
  const session = await LanguageModel.create({
    expectedInputs: [{ type: "text" }, { type: "image" }],
    expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
  });
}
```

### Gating UI on availability

The following example enables or disables a translation button based on the availability of a mode. It gives the user the option to download the model if it is not available.

```js
const translateButton = document.querySelector("#translate");

const status = await LanguageModel.availability();

> translateButton.disabled = status === "unavailable";

Reviewer: FMI do we really want to enable the button if already downloading

Author: Fixed.

Reviewer: There are some commit errors here.

Author: Fixed.

---
title: "LanguageModel: availability() static method"
short-title: availability()
slug: Web/API/LanguageModel/availability_static
page-type: web-api-static-method
spec-urls: https://webmachinelearning.github.io/prompt-api/
---

{{APIRef("Prompt API")}}{{SecureContext_Header}}

The **`availability()`** static method of the {{domxref("LanguageModel")}} interface returns the availability status of the browser's language model for the given options, without creating a session or triggering a download.

> Use `availability()` before calling {{domxref("LanguageModel.create_static", "LanguageModel.create()")}} to determine whether the desired configuration is supported. This avoids initiating a session only to have it fail, and lets you provide a meaningful fallback to users when the model is not available.

Reviewer: So what if it would fail? Should/can we say that this is a token-free option? Or is it just much faster fail?

Author: In next commit:

"This avoids initiating a session (and spending tokens) only to have it fail."

## Syntax

```js-nolint
LanguageModel.availability()
LanguageModel.availability(options)
```

### Parameters

- `options` {{optional_inline}}
  - : Represents the base set of options used when checking language model availability or creating a session. Options include:

>     - `expectedInputs`

Reviewer: does the object require this, if it is defined at all? Or are all options optional? 

Given that we have `availability()` with no options, there must be a default for each of these right? What is it?

Author: It's optional, but has no default.

Reviewer: @jmedley There are a number of open issue like this one. YOu can see them listed in the side. Each should be resolved with an answer - they are still open.

<img width="518" height="500" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4fa667dd-b87a-4c91-ab46-13ee9ae1f1b3" />

In this case the question is, can you really pass this without and options object, and if you can, what does it mean to do so? It probably defaults to something like a text type and English, but we should say.

Author: Fixed.

>       - : An array representing the required input modalities and languages. Options include:

Reviewer: Is this really an array. Something with options is an object. Ditto for the other cases.

Reviewer: SO I think it is, but you mean this (if so, make sure all other instances do the same thing)

```suggestion
      - : An array representing the required input modalities and languages.
        Each entry is an object that may define the following options:
```

Author: Yes, it's really an array.

        - `type`

>           - : A string from the `LanguageModelMessageType` enumeration indicating the content type. Must be one of:

Reviewer: This `LanguageModelMessageType` doesn't exist - we document enumerations as options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          - : A string indicating the content type. Must be one of:
```

- `"available"`
  - : The model is ready to use with the given options.
- `"downloadable"`
  - : The model can support the given options but requires a download that has not yet started.
- `"downloading"`
  - : The model can support the given options and a download is currently in progress.
- `"unavailable"`
  - : The model cannot support the given options, or the user agent cannot determine availability (for example, due to a transient error). This value may sometimes indicate a transient error. In which case, the caller should retry or fall back to an alternative implementation.

## Examples

### Checking basic availability

```js
const status = await LanguageModel.availability();

switch (status) {
  case "available":
    console.log("Model is ready.");
    break;
  case "downloadable":
    console.log("Model needs to be downloaded first.");
    break;
  case "downloading":
    console.log("Model is currently downloading.");
    break;
  case "unavailable":
    console.log("Model is not available on this device.");
    break;
}
```

### Requesting input support

> This example shows how to determine whether a particular type of input is supported by the model.

Reviewer: Thanks for this. In document descriptions we are general and in examples we tend to be more specific.

```suggestion
This example shows how to determine whether text and image inputs are supported by the model.
```

```js
const status = await LanguageModel.availability({
  expectedInputs: [{ type: "text" }, { type: "image" }],
});
```

### Checking availability for a specific language

> The following example tests whether the model suports English before asking it to translate Japanes text to English.

Reviewer: Great. Just a typo. 
```suggestion
The following example tests whether the model suports English before asking it to translate Japanese text to English.
```

```js
const status = await LanguageModel.availability({
  expectedInputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["ja"] }],
  expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
});

if (status === "available") {
  const session = await LanguageModel.create({
    expectedInputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["ja"] }],
    expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
  });
  const translation = await session.prompt("桜はきれいです");
  console.log(translation);
}
```

### Checking availability for a multimodal configuration

> 

Reviewer: What does this do? I'd have a sentence and link to your concepts section on multimodel to explain what that means.

Author: In the next commit. I hope I got the anchor right.

{{MacroName("Prompt_API", "Multimodal input", "#multimodal-input")}} is when different types of input such as text and image may be used in the same session. Since the availability of input types varies by language model, your code should check the availability of desired modes before creating a session. An example is shown here.

Author: There is text here now. Is there something else you want me to do?

Reviewer: Edited. @jmedley So the right way to check the link is to render the docs and click it. I can tell you it is wrong because MacroName is a placeholder. A link like this would use the `domxref` macro. If you can't remember the format, then you can always just use a direct link, which is what I have done in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/43848/changes/55a8e13f1099ed94245f8a28502cc724b7a48805

You will note that I made a lot of changes in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/43848/changes/55a8e13f1099ed94245f8a28502cc724b7a48805. That's because when I rendered it locally I could see that the macro was broken, the definition list was broken. The text in the different input arrays describing them as arrays and objects was broken. 

It is now IMO looking good. I have one more question which I will add separately. It is actually the same question, but answered where it is most relevant.

Reviewer: Once you have read this ^^^ you can set this issue as resolved!

```js
const availability = await LanguageModel.availability({
  expectedInputs: [{ type: "text" }, { type: "image" }],
  expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
});

if (availability === "unavailable") {
  console.warn("This configuration is not supported.");
} else {
  const session = await LanguageModel.create({
    expectedInputs: [{ type: "text" }, { type: "image" }],
    expectedOutputs: [{ type: "text", languages: ["en"] }],
  });
}
```

### Gating UI on availability

> The following example enables or disables a translation button based on the availability of a model. It gives the user the option to download the model if it is not available.

Reviewer: Thanks. This is a reasonable minimal comment.

            It receives the arguments the model provides and must return a {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves with a {{jsxref("String")}} representing the tool's result.

### Return value

A {{jsxref("Promise")}} that resolves with one of the values listed below.
If you request multiple input types and any are unavailable, then the promise resolves with `"unavailable"`.

- `"available"`
  - : The model is ready to use with the given options.
- `"downloadable"`
  - : The model can support the given options but requires a download that has not yet started.
- `"downloading"`
  - : The model can support the given options and a download is currently in progress.
- `"unavailable"`
  - : The model cannot support the given options, or the user agent cannot determine availability (for example, due to a transient error).
    This value may sometimes indicate a transient error. In that case, the caller should retry or fall back to an alternative implementation.

## Examples

### Checking model availability

This example checks whether the model is available without specifying any restraints and then logs the status.

```js

> const status = await LanguageModel.availability();

Reviewer: By adding the optional tagging above and showing this example you have verified that you can indeed request a model without any options. Thanks.

Now, consider the case where I take this model and I want to use it for both text and images. Will it work? 
Or to put it another way, what is the point calling the model like this? What will it prove to me as a user. When can I do this and it will be useful?

My assertion from scanning the spec is that a developer doing this will know only that there is some model available, probably supporting text as that is the default. They won't know anything else, at all.
So this is really just useful for feature checking that the API is supported, and there are better ways of doing that. 

We need to say that (if it is true). Could be as simple as a note that this is a pointless thing to do.

Author: I think the next two examples cover availability better. I've just removed this.
